From the example of the throwing baseball with sticking various substances, no one can accurately foresee where the ball's trajectory using each of our sticky gue.
One thing we can do, is to decide whether or not to trow that ball.
I recall Kevin Kelly's perspective on technology which I think I'm very much influenced especially by his book "What Technology wants."
I generally think the inventions from Thomas Midgley was necessary.
The only definite thing we can say is that we will obtain the knowledge to "choose" whether we want to use. Even the last part he died on his on invention, he made the decision to use and test his creation. We are forced to choose without knowing the final outcome, and we learn from that, so that we will be able to decide on the next unpredictable. A well renowned Pesticide called DDT was once used widely, and got forbidden, used as a chemical weapon, completely having thought as evil to use, is recently taken into reconsideration to be utilized in a controlled way. One opposite example will be smartphones. Some people blame that smartphones (or a gadget) do not last long enough both physically and feature wise, making to purchase the latest model in such a short period. Yet, the speed of the cycle or iteration that we change our phones anew, is actually what bolstered the technology. I would not be surprised that manufacturer's engineer the durability of a product just to last through the warranty covering.

Another reflection is asking how we acknowledge credit. The story referred about the periodic table a multiple times, which Thomas used as a tool to find the solutions. We tend to forget that geniuses also uses things that was already discovered, and see them as people who just came up with there talent by themselves. It is clear that he him self is standing on another's shoulders. What I think is that we lack on metrics to measure influences within knowledge inheritance, if Thomas's invention gave certain impact to the society whether good or bad, so should Dmitri Mendeleev who is responsible of arranging the periodic table should also gain or loose some fraction of his reputation. The degree we rely on others knowledge is increasing since the cost of reference has decreased by the internet, but the system how we address responsibility is limited by our cognitive capacity.

http://kk.org/thetechnium/
